PRACTICAL-04
Zombie Process

OSSP (Operating Systems And Systems Programming) - 25CS2104E

Student Name : Karkala Shiva Reddy
Roll Number  : 2520030105

Objective:
To understand zombie processes by creating a child process that
exits before its parent collects its exit status, observing the
Z (defunct) state, and then cleaning it up using wait().

Requirements:
1. Create a child process using fork().
2. Have the child exit immediately while the parent sleeps.
3. Observe the zombie (Z) state using ps command.
4. Collect the child exit status using wait().
5. Demonstrate cleanup of zombie processes.

Source Files:
src/zombie.c
src/zombie1.c

Output Files:
outputs/zombie_output.txt
outputs/zombie1_output.txt
outputs/zombie_ps_output.txt

Program Design:

zombie.c:
  Stage 1: Parent process starts and displays its PID.
  Stage 2: fork() creates a child process.
  Stage 3: Child exits immediately with exit(0).
  Stage 4: Parent sleeps for 15 seconds without calling wait().
           During this time the child is a zombie (Z state).
  Stage 5: Parent calls wait() to collect child exit status.
  Stage 6: Zombie is cleaned up and parent exits.

zombie1.c:
  Stage 1: Parent starts and creates two children.
  Stage 2: Both children exit immediately.
  Stage 3: Both children become zombies.
  Stage 4: Parent sleeps for 10 seconds.
  Stage 5: Parent collects exit status of each child using
           waitpid().
  Stage 6: All zombies cleaned up, parent exits.

Zombie Process:

A zombie process is a process that has completed execution
(exit()) but still has an entry in the process table. This
happens because the parent has not yet called wait() to
collect the child's exit status.

The zombie state is indicated by 'Z' in the ps output and
the process is shown as <defunct>.

  Process Lifecycle:
    Running -> Terminated -> Zombie -> (wait collected) -> Removed

  Parent calls wait()/waitpid():
    The kernel removes the zombie entry from the process table
    and the parent receives the child's exit status.

  Parent does NOT call wait():
    The zombie entry remains in the process table until the
    parent exits (init/systemd adopts and collects it).

Observations:

--- zombie.c Output (outputs/zombie_output.txt) ---

  Parent PID: 4210
  Child PID:  4211
  Child exits immediately.
  Parent sleeps for 15 seconds.
  During sleep, child is visible as zombie (Z) in ps.
  After 15 seconds, parent calls wait() and zombie is removed.

--- zombie1.c Output (outputs/zombie1_output.txt) ---

  Parent PID: 4305
  Child 1 PID: 4306, exits with status 1
  Child 2 PID: 4307, exits with status 2
  Both children become zombies during parent sleep.
  Parent collects each child status with waitpid().

--- ps Observation (outputs/zombie_ps_output.txt) ---

  F S   UID     PID    PPID  C PRI  NI ADDR SZ WCHAN  TTY          TIME CMD
  Z    1000    4211    4210  0  80   0     0 -      pts/0    00:00:00 zombie <defunct>

  The Z state and <defunct> label confirm the zombie process.

Compilation and Execution:

  gcc -o zombie zombie.c
  ./zombie

  gcc -o zombie1 zombie1.c
  ./zombie1

  While the program is running, in another terminal:
  ps -l | grep defunct

Result:
The programs successfully demonstrate the creation of zombie
processes and their cleanup. zombie.c shows a single zombie
created when the parent does not call wait() immediately.
zombie1.c extends this to multiple children, showing that
each child becomes a zombie and each must be collected
individually using waitpid().

Conclusion:
A zombie process is created when a child process exits before
the parent calls wait(). The child's exit status is retained
in the process table as a zombie entry until the parent
collects it. If the parent exits without calling wait(), the
zombie is adopted by init/systemd which automatically collects
it. Proper use of wait()/waitpid() prevents zombie processes
from accumulating in the system.
