PRACTICAL-06
Client Server Communication using Named Pipes (FIFO)

OSSP (Operating Systems And Systems Programming) - 25CS2104E

Student Name : Karkala Shiva Reddy
Roll Number  : 2520030105

Objective:
To implement client-server communication using named pipes
(FIFOs). The server and client exchange a message and a
response through two FIFOs, demonstrating inter-process
communication between two separate programs.

Requirements:
1. Create two named pipes (fifo1 and fifo2) using mkfifo().
2. Server reads the client message from fifo1.
3. Client writes a message to fifo1.
4. Server writes a response to fifo2.
5. Client reads the server response from fifo2.

Source Files:
src/server.c
src/cilent.c

Output Files:
outputs/server_output.txt
outputs/cilent_output.txt

Program Design:

  Named Pipes (FIFOs):
    - A FIFO is a named pipe created with mkfifo().
    - It is a unidirectional data channel, so two FIFOs are
      needed for bidirectional communication.
    - fifo1 is used for Client -> Server messages.
    - fifo2 is used for Server -> Client responses.
    - open() on a FIFO blocks until both ends are open:
        - The server opens fifo1 for reading and blocks until
          the client opens fifo1 for writing.
        - The client opens fifo2 for reading and blocks until
          the server opens fifo2 for writing.

  Server Program (server.c):
    1. Create fifo1 and fifo2 with mkfifo(fifo, 0666).
    2. Open fifo1 in read-only mode (blocks until client
       connects).
    3. Read the client message and print it as "Client: ...".
    4. Close fifo1.
    5. Read the response from the keyboard
       ("Enter response: ").
    6. Open fifo2 in write-mode (blocks until the client opens
       fifo2 for reading).
    7. Write the response to fifo2 and close it.

  Client Program (cilent.c):
    1. Read the message from the keyboard ("Enter message: ").
    2. Open fifo1 in write-mode (blocks until the server opens
       fifo1 for reading).
    3. Write the message to fifo1 and close it.
    4. Open fifo2 in read-only mode (blocks until the server
       opens fifo2 for writing).
    5. Read the server response and print it as
       "Server: ...".
    6. Close fifo2.

  Communication Flow:

    Server                               Client
    ------                               ------
    mkfifo(fifo1), mkfifo(fifo2)
    open(fifo1, O_RDONLY) ----- blocks ---
                                         open(fifo1, O_WRONLY)
                                         write message
                                         close(fifo1)
    read message
    printf "Client: <message>"
    "Enter response: "
    open(fifo2, O_WRONLY) ----- blocks ---
                                         open(fifo2, O_RDONLY)
    write response
    close(fifo2)                         read response
                                         printf "Server: <response>"
                                         close(fifo2)

FIFO Behavior:

  - mkfifo() creates a named pipe in the filesystem.
  - open() on a FIFO blocks until a process opens the other end
    of the FIFO.
  - After both ends are open, read()/write() transfer data
    through the kernel pipe buffer.
  - FIFO files remain in the directory after the programs exit
    and can be removed with rm.

Observations:

--- Server Output (outputs/server_output.txt) ---

  Client: Hello server from client

  Enter response:

  The server created the FIFOs, received the client message
  "Hello server from client", displayed it, and then read a
  response from the keyboard. The response "Response from
  server" was written to fifo2.

--- Client Output (outputs/cilent_output.txt) ---

  Enter message: Server: Response from server

  The client read the message "Hello server from client" from
  the keyboard, wrote it to fifo1, then read the server
  response "Response from server" from fifo2 and displayed it.

  The message and the response were correctly transferred in
  both directions through the two FIFOs.

Compilation and Execution:

  gcc -o server server.c
  gcc -o cilent cilent.c

  Terminal 1 (server):
    ./server

  Terminal 2 (client):
    ./cilent

  In the client terminal type a message and press Enter.
  In the server terminal type a response and press Enter.
  The client displays the server's response.

  The two programs were run in two separate terminals; the
  FIFO open() calls blocked until both sides were ready, and
  the message and response were exchanged successfully.

Result:
The program successfully demonstrates client-server
communication using named pipes (FIFOs). The client sent the
message "Hello server from client" through fifo1 and the server
displayed it. The server then sent the response "Response from
server" through fifo2 and the client displayed it. Both
programs terminated normally after the exchange.

Conclusion:
Named pipes (FIFOs) provide a simple method of inter-process
communication between separate programs. Each FIFO is
unidirectional, so two FIFOs are required for bidirectional
communication: one for client-to-server messages and one for
server-to-client responses. The blocking open() behaviour
automatically synchronizes the two processes, ensuring the
message and response are transferred in the correct order.