PRACTICAL-01
Process Creation and Command Execution

OSSP (Operating Systems And Systems Programming) - 25CS2104E

Student Name : Karkala Shiva Reddy
Roll Number  : 2520030105

Objective:
To understand process creation and execution of a Linux command
entered by a user using fork(), exec(), and wait() system calls,
and to investigate the relationship between hardware resources and
operating system services.

Requirements:
1. Accept a Linux command as input from the user.
2. Create a child process using fork().
3. Execute the command in the child process using execvp().
4. Allow the parent process to wait for the child using wait().
5. Display the Process ID (PID) of both parent and child processes.
6. Investigate hardware and OS relationships using Linux commands.

Source File:
src/program.c

Output File:
outputs/command_output.txt

How the C Program Works:

1. The program prompts the user to enter a Linux command.
2. The input is read using fgets() and tokenized into arguments
   using strtok() with space and tab as delimiters.
3. The parent process displays its PID using getpid().
4. fork() is called to create a child process.
5. If fork() returns 0, the child process executes the entered
   command using execvp(), which searches PATH for the command.
6. If fork() returns a positive value, the parent calls wait()
   to block until the child terminates.
7. After the child finishes, the parent prints a completion message.

Key System Calls:
- fork(): Creates a new child process by duplicating the parent.
  Returns 0 in the child and the child's PID in the parent.
- execvp(): Replaces the child's program image with the specified
  command. Accepts an argument array, supporting commands with
  arguments (e.g., ls -l, uname -a).
- wait(): Causes the parent to suspend execution until the child
  terminates. Ensures proper synchronization.
- getpid(): Returns the process ID of the calling process.
- getppid(): Returns the parent process ID of the calling process.

Hardware and OS Investigation:

The following Linux commands were used to investigate the relationship
between hardware resources and operating system services.

--- uname -a ---
Output (from outputs/hardware_uname.txt):
Linux shiva 6.18.33.2-microsoft-standard-WSL2 #1 SMP PREEMPT_DYNAMIC
Thu Jun 18 21:54:43 UTC 2026 x86_64 GNU/Linux

Analysis:
uname reveals kernel and OS information. The kernel version
(6.18.33.2), architecture (x86_64), and OS type (GNU/Linux) show
how the OS abstracts the underlying hardware. The kernel provides
a uniform interface regardless of the physical CPU. In WSL2, the
Linux kernel runs on top of the Windows Hyper-V hypervisor,
demonstrating an additional layer of abstraction.

--- lscpu ---
Output (from outputs/hardware_lscpu.txt):
Architecture:            x86_64
CPU(s):                  12
Model name:              13th Gen Intel(R) Core(TM) i5-1334U
Thread(s) per core:      2
Core(s) per socket:      6
Socket(s):               1
Virtualization:          VT-x
Hypervisor vendor:       Microsoft

Analysis:
lscpu shows CPU architecture and topology. The OS reports 12 logical
CPUs from 6 physical cores with hyper-threading. The OS abstracts
these cores as schedulable processors. The kernel's scheduler
distributes tasks across these CPUs. Applications see a uniform set
of processors without needing to know the physical hardware layout.
The hypervisor vendor (Microsoft) indicates WSL2 virtualization.

--- lsblk ---
Output (from outputs/hardware_lsblk.txt):
NAME MAJ:MIN RM   SIZE RO TYPE MOUNTPOINTS
sda    8:0    0 356.9M  1 disk
sdb    8:16   0 159.4M  1 disk
sdc    8:32   0     2G  0 disk [SWAP]
sdd    8:48   0     1T  0 disk /mnt/wslg/distro /

Analysis:
lsblk shows block storage devices. The OS presents physical and
virtual disks as block devices with logical names (sda, sdb, etc.).
The root filesystem (/) resides on sdd (1TB virtual disk). The OS
abstracts storage through the VFS (Virtual File System) layer,
providing a unified file-based interface to different storage
devices. Swap space (sdc) provides virtual memory by using disk
as an extension of RAM.

--- ps ---
Output (from outputs/hardware_ps.txt):
Shows 67+ processes including systemd, udev workers, snapd,
rsyslogd, bash sessions, etc.

Analysis:
ps reveals the OS process abstraction. Each running program is
represented as a process with a unique PID. The OS schedules these
processes on the available CPUs. Process states (running, sleeping,
zombie) show how the kernel manages execution. The init/systemd
process (PID 1) is the ancestor of all user processes, demonstrating
the process tree structure managed by the kernel.

--- top ---
Output (from outputs/hardware_top.txt):
Tasks: 67 total, 1 running, 66 sleeping, 0 stopped, 0 zombie
%Cpu(s): 0.0 us, 0.8 sy, 0.0 ni, 99.2 id
MiB Mem: 7762.6 total, 5883.9 free, 679.5 used
MiB Swap: 2048.0 total, 2048.0 free, 0.0 used

Analysis:
top provides dynamic real-time monitoring. It shows CPU utilization
(user/system/idle), memory usage (total/free/used), and per-process
resource consumption. The OS abstracts physical RAM into virtual
memory pages. The load average (0.48, 0.54, 0.23) shows the kernel's
view of CPU demand over 1, 5, and 15 minute intervals.

OS Abstractions:

CPU Abstraction:
The OS kernel acts as a scheduler, abstracting multiple CPU cores
into a shared pool of processing time. Each process believes it has
access to a CPU, while the kernel time-slices the actual hardware
among all runnable processes. The 12 logical CPUs reported by lscpu
are managed by the kernel scheduler.

Memory Abstraction:
The OS provides virtual memory to each process, giving it an
isolated address space. Physical RAM (7762.6 MiB) is managed by the
kernel through paging and swapping. The swap partition extends
available memory. Processes cannot directly access physical memory;
the kernel mediates all memory access.

Storage Abstraction:
The VFS layer provides a unified file interface regardless of the
underlying storage device. Block devices (sda-sdd) are presented
as files under /dev. The mount system call attaches filesystems to
directories. Applications use open/read/write/close without knowing
the physical disk geometry.

I/O Device Abstraction:
Device drivers translate hardware-specific operations into standard
system calls. The udev subsystem (visible in ps output with many
udev-worker processes) manages device detection and configuration.
Applications interact with devices through file descriptors, treating
hardware I/O as file operations.

Conclusion:
The practical demonstrates how Linux processes are created using
fork() and how commands are executed using exec(). The hardware
investigation shows that applications do not directly manipulate
hardware. Instead, the OS kernel provides abstractions for CPU
scheduling, memory management, storage access, and I/O operations
through system calls and device drivers. The observed Linux commands
(uname, lscpu, lsblk, ps, top) each reveal different aspects of
how the OS bridges the gap between physical hardware and user-level
applications.
